upgrade docs signifficant refinement (#2296)
elastic/docs-content: deploy-manage/upgrade.md

---
applies_to:
  stack:
  deployment:
    eck:
    ess:
    ece:
    self:
products:
  - id: kibana
  - id: cloud-enterprise
  - id: cloud-hosted
  - id: cloud-kubernetes
  - id: elasticsearch
---

# Upgrade

Upgrading to the latest version provides access to the newest Elastic features, security patches, performance improvements, and bug fixes. These updates reduce costs, speed up threat response, and improve investigative and analytical data tools.

As Elastic releases new versions, older versions of Elastic products reach their end of life on a set schedule. To keep your deployment supported, stay up to date. For more information, refer to [Product End of Life Dates](https://www.elastic.co/support/eol).

::::{note}
With [{{serverless-full}}](/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/serverless.md), upgrades are fully managed by Elastic. Users automatically receive the latest features and improvements, with no need to plan or perform upgrade steps.

> ::::

Author: updated, feel free to share your thoughts.

---
applies_to:
  stack:
  deployment:
    eck:
    ess:
    ece:
    self:
products:
  - id: kibana
  - id: cloud-enterprise
  - id: cloud-hosted
  - id: cloud-kubernetes
  - id: elasticsearch
---

# Upgrade

Upgrading to the latest version provides access to the newest Elastic features, security patches, performance improvements, and bug fixes. These updates reduce costs, speed up threat response, and improve investigative and analytical data tools.

> When Elastic releases new versions, older versions reach their end of life on a set schedule. To keep your deployment supported, stay up to date. For more information, refer to [Product End of Life Dates](https://www.elastic.co/support/eol).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As Elastic releases new versions, older versions of Elastic products reach their end of life on a set schedule. To keep your deployment supported, stay up to date. For more information, refer to [Product End of Life Dates](https://www.elastic.co/support/eol).
```
I'd use `as` rather than `when` because the latter seems to me to suggest that there's some connection between the timing of new versions and the product EOLs, but I think they're completely independent.

:::

## Upgrade overview

Upgrading your Elastic cluster or deployment involves several stages, including planning, preparation, and execution. This section guides you through the full upgrade process:

- [Plan your upgrade](./upgrade/plan-upgrade.md): Review compatibility, define your upgrade path and order, and understand important pre-upgrade considerations.

- [Prepare to upgrade](./upgrade/prepare-to-upgrade.md): Follow detailed preparation steps for major, minor, and patch upgrades. Identify breaking changes, run the Upgrade Assistant (for major upgrades), and verify readiness.

- [Upgrade your deployment or cluster](./upgrade/deployment-or-cluster.md): Step-by-step instructions for performing the upgrade, organized by deployment type:

    - [Upgrade deployments on {{ech}}](/deploy-manage/upgrade/deployment-or-cluster/upgrade-on-ech.md)
    - [Upgrade deployments on {{ece}}](/deploy-manage/upgrade/deployment-or-cluster/upgrade-on-ece.md)
    - [Upgrade deployments on {{eck}}](/deploy-manage/upgrade/deployment-or-cluster/upgrade-on-eck.md)
    - [Upgrade self-managed clusters](/deploy-manage/upgrade/deployment-or-cluster/self-managed.md)

> - [Upgrade ingest components](./upgrade/ingest-components.md): Covers supporting components such as Beats, Elastic Agent, Logstash, and APM Server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Upgrade ingest components](./upgrade/ingest-components.md): Covers supporting components such as {{beats}}, {{agent}}, {{ls}}, and APM Server.
```

Additionally, if you're using a self-managed orchestration platform such as {{ece}} or {{eck}}, refer to [Upgrade your ECE or ECK orchestrator](/deploy-manage/upgrade/orchestrator.md) to keep the orchestrator up to date.

## Upgrade paths [upgrade-paths]

> You can upgrade to a higher version if the target version was released *after* your current version. Upgrades to versions released *before* your current version are not supported, even if the version number is higher. Refer to [out-of-order releases](/deploy-manage/upgrade/deployment-or-cluster.md#out-of-order-releases) for more information.

Reviewer: Thanks Edu. That works for me! 👍

For example:  
- ✅ Upgrade allowed: From 9.0.4 to 9.1.0 (9.1.0 released *after* 9.0.4)
- ❌ Not allowed: From 9.0.5 to 9.1.0 (9.1.0 released *before* 9.0.5) → wait for 9.1.1 to be released
<!--
Uncomment this examples when 9.1.1 is released.
- ✅ Upgrade allowed: From 9.0.5 to 9.1.1 (9.1.1 released *after* 9.0.5)
-->

### Upgrade paths from 8.x [upgrade-paths-8.x]

To perform a major upgrade from 8.x, the required starting version depends on the target release:

- To upgrade to the **9.0.x series**, you must be on **8.18.x**.
- To upgrade to **9.1.0 or later**, you must be on **8.19.x**, which is the latest minor release of the 8.x series.

::::{note}
While 8.19 is the final minor release in the 8.x series, 8.18 was released at the same time as 9.0, enabling a supported upgrade path between the 8.18.x and 9.0.x series. This compatibility also applies to other features and clients.
::::

The following upgrade paths from 8.x are valid for reaching the latest {{version.stack}} release:

* Versions prior to 8.18 → 8.19.x → {{version.stack}} *(recommended)*

> * Versions prior to 8.18 → 8.18.x → 9.0.x → {{version.stack}}

Reviewer 2: Yes, same thing there, let's just give clear guidance
